Their fall from the tower sends
Ethic and Hedge
spinning into the rapids
of a river of pure energy.
This torrent flows from the Bradbarrier
all the way to Huxenborg.
There an entire city’s worth of factories
build the robots
and house the Node of Memory,
the last of the three powerful artifacts
Ethic needs to collect.
After a long day and a longer night
they find themselves
in a canyon of brick and steel.
Just when they’re about to reach
the end of the line,
a rope catches them.
Their savior, Lemma,
has been waiting for them.
When Ethic claimed the Node of Creation
from the forest tower,
radios all across the land
came back to life.
Adila, the resistance leader,
immediately started contacting her allies,
none more important than Lemma,
a brilliant scientist working from within
Huxenborg to bring down the machines.
Unfortunately, the radios
also tipped off the robots.
So they’ve taken defensive measures
to protect the final artifact in its home
in the very heart of the city.
There’s only one way to get there:
the gauntlet of forking paths.
It’s a deadly series of luminous conveyors
that wind underneath Huxenborg.
Starting from the current position,
each section runs for a distance,
then splits in two.
Every branch does the same thing,
again and again.
There are thousands of branches.
Only one path leads to the artifact;
all the others to destruction.
Fortunately, the Node of Creation
has granted Hedge a strange power:
he can produce slightly smaller versions
of himself.
Each version can do only two things:
radio information back to its parent,
and produce slightly smaller
versions of itself…
which can do the same two things,
as can their children,
for as many generations as needed.
A patrol is closing in on their position,
so Ethic’s time is limited.
What instructions should she give
Hedge to find the one safe path?
Pause the video to figure it out yourself.
Hint in 3
Hint in 2
Hint in 1
Programmers have an elegant tool
in their arsenal called recursion.
Recursion is when you have a set of
instructions that refers back to itself.
It’s like using a word
in its own definition,
except where that’s frowned upon,
this is incredibly effective.
Recursion involves repetition,
but in a different way than loops.
Where a loop takes one action
and repeats it again and again,
recursion will start an action,
and before it’s finished, use it again,
and before that’s finished,
use it again, and so on.
It keeps doing this until
some end state is reached.
It then passes the information back up,
layer after layer,
until it reaches the top
and ends the cycle.
Recursion is ideal for problems
that involve self-similarity,
where each part resembles
the larger whole.
Like, for example, a deadly defense
system designed to end any person or thing
who dares tread upon it.
Pause the video to figure it out yourself.
Solution in 3
Solution in 2
Solution in 1
Ethic’s conundrum seems sprawling
on the surface,
but there’s a remarkably simple
solution to it using recursion.
In order to find it, let’s first look
at the simplest version of this puzzle:
what if the entire maze
were just two paths?
If Hedge copies himself, the copy
that goes the wrong way will be destroyed.
So the other one,
which will reach the artifact,
can radio back the path it took,
and then no matter which way is correct,
that’s the answer Hedge will receive.
This is called the "base case"
of the recursion.
Now, suppose the maze
branches twice from the starting point,
and at every intersection,
Hedge’s copies—
let’s call them Twig 1 and Twig 2—
make more copies—
let’s call them Leaves 1 through 4.
Three Leaves will be destroyed.
The one that reaches the artifact
will radio back the right answer,
but only to its parent.
So if Twig 1 or 2 is waiting
at an intersection
and hears something over the radio,
that’s the right way to go
to the artifact from where it is.
To tell Hedge the right answer
from his perspective,
the Twig should say which way it went,
and then the route
it just heard over the radio.
This same process will work no matter
how many times the maze branches.
Any answer a copy hears on the radio
must be the way to the control room
from its location,
and if it then adds the branch it took,
it can tell its parent
how to get there as well.
We can sum up the instructions
in an action called Pathfinder
that every version of Hedge will follow:
1. If you’ve reached the artifact,
radio to your parent whether
you got there by going left or right.
2. When you reach an intersection,
move off the conveyor
and send new copies down the left
and right paths.
Have them each run Pathfinder.
This is where recursion comes in,
and this may happen many times before
the last instruction triggers, which is:
3. If you hear anything over the radio,
you should radio to your parent
whether you got to your spot
by going left or right,
then repeat everything you just heard.
Pathfinder is an example
of what programmers call functions,
subroutines, or procedures.
No matter the terminology,
the idea is the same—
it’s a set of instructions given a label
so that it can be easily reused—
perhaps even by itself.
And in our case that’ll work perfectly—
an entire network of paths mapped
using just three instructions.
So here's what happens.
By the time the patrol rounds the corner,
Ethic and Lemma have improvised disguises.
They try to confuse the bots
long enough to buy Hedge time.
Finally, Hedge’s radio crackles to life
with a series of directions.
The three dive onto the conveyor
and flee for their lives,
with a squadron of enforcer bots
in hot pursuit.